OCPSTRAT-139: Ingress operator dashboard (#1431)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/ingress-dashboard.md

---
title: ingress-dashboard
authors:
  - "@jotak"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@OlivierCazade"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"

>   - "@candita"

Author: @Miciah @candita I set you as both reviewers and approvers, let me know if that's ok / if I should add more people

Reviewer: @jotak please add the epic number to the title, and a brief description.

---
title: ingress-dashboard
authors:
  - "@jotak"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@OlivierCazade"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@candita"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2023-06-28
last-updated: 2023-06-28
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-139"
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NETOBSERV-1052"
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Ingress dashboard creation for the OpenShift Console

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`.
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements.
- [ ] Test plan is defined.
- [ ] graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-Facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/).

## Summary

> Add a new dashboard in the OpenShift Console (in menu “Observe” > “Dashboards”), dedicated to metrics related to Ingress.

Reviewer: The summary should include a mention of the new controller for the dashboard.

Author: done

Ingress components, such as HAProxy, already provide some metrics that are exposed and collected by Prometheus / Cluster Monitoring. Administrators should be able to get a consolidated view, using a subset of these metrics, to get a quick overview of the cluster state. This enhancement proposal is part of a wider initiative to improve the observability of networking components (cf https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-139).

## Motivation

> While ingress related metrics already exist and are accessible in the OpenShift Console (via the menu “Observe” > Metrics”), there is no consolidated view presenting a summary of them. There are existing dashboards in other areas (such as etcd, compute resources, etc.), but networking today is less represented there, despite its importance for monitoring and troubleshooting.

Reviewer: Can you begin listing what general things are important for monitoring and troubleshooting?  This will help us pick which of the existing metrics we have that we can add to the dashboard.

Author: On HAProxy, metrics such as error rates or latencies are certainly important to monitor; I've updated the EP to insist on these ones.
PMs have asked for cluster level statistics on number of routes and shards to use, so this is also mentioned here

In addition, product management has shown interest in providing and making more visible some cluster-wide statistics such as the number of routes and shards in use.

> This [request for enhancement](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1059) is also considered here, although it will not be entirely fulfilled as we don't intend here to create any new metric.

Reviewer: Please remove the references to NE-1059, I'd rather not pull that work into this EP.

### Goals

> 1. Review and select a subset of the available metrics that should be included in the new dashboard. This should ideally be done with the help of the NetEdge team expertise and/or SREs.

Reviewer: This should be a part of the EP, a list of the required metrics.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that an _exact_ list of metrics needs to be identified in the EP, at least initially. It would be better to have the mechanics wired up so that we can iteratively and incrementally add new metrics once we understand what would be genuinely useful to a cluster administrator/operator. Finding useful metrics could come from taking an existing Grafana dashboard, looking at HAProxy's built-in dashboard, working with SREs, et al.

Reviewer: I did provide a writeup that listed our available metrics, and a proposal we used when we were talking to SRE about this over a year ago.

> 2. Design a new dashboard with these metrics.

Reviewer: Design only?  No implementation?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Design and implement a new dashboard with these metrics.
```

> 3. Update the Ingress Operator to deploy this dashboard, making it accessible for Cluster Monitoring consumption.

Reviewer: What is `Cluster Monitoring consumption`?

Author: it was reformulated

### Non-Goals

> - This work is not intended to provide a comprehensive set of metrics all at once. Instead, the intent is to "start small", setting in place all the mechanisms in code, and iterate later based on feedback to add or amend elements in the dashboard without any code change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This work is not intended to provide a comprehensive set of metrics all at once. Instead, the intent is to "start small", setting in place all the mechanisms in code, and iterate later based on feedback to add or amend elements in the dashboard without any  changes to the operator.
```

Author: reformulated

- This enhancement does not include any new metric creation or exposition: only already available metrics are considered. If discussions lead to consider the creation of new metrics, this could be the purpose of a follow-up enhancement.

### User Stories

> As a cluster administrator, I want to get a quick overview of general cluster statistics, such as the number of routes or shards in use.

> > As a cluster administrator, I want to get a quick insight in incoming traffic statistics, such as on latency and HTTP errors.

Author: The number of routes/shard can be derived from metrics already available in cluster's prometheus. I'm updating the EP to list more precisely which exact metrics / prom queries are being used to get such data

## Proposal

> To make a new dashboard discoverable by Cluster Monitoring, a `ConfigMap` needs to be created in the namespace `openshift-config-managed`, containing a static dashboard definition in Grafana format (JSON). The dashboard datasource has to be Cluster Monitoring's Prometheus.

Reviewer: Could you add some details about what needs to happen in order for us to move metrics to that datasource?  Are we already publishing to that datasource?

> The Ingress Operator is responsible for creating and reconciling this `ConfigMap`. We assume all metrics used in the dashboard are present unconditionally, which allows us to create a static dashboard unconditionally as well.

Reviewer: What is involved with reconciling the ConfigMap?  Do we need to reconcile the content, or will the content be versioned so that we only need to reconcile the version?

Reviewer 3: Any operator would embed a static and full json dashboard.
If the operator  detect any change between the deployed dashboard and the embedded one, the deployed dashboard is replaced totally by the embedded one.

> In the event where conditional display should be introduced later (e.g. an alternative to HAProxy being implemented, resulting is different metrics to display), different approaches can be discussed: the dashboard could be dynamically amended via JSON manipulation; or several dashboards could be embedded and selectively installed.

Reviewer: I think this should be pointed out as a goal or non-goal based on the commitment.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph is not about what is going to be done here but more an hypothetical suggestion about what could be done if at some point there is a need for dashboard with dynamic content.

We ca remove the paragraph if you prefer.

> The content of the dashboard will be further discussed and refined, including during review and verification.

Reviewer: I expect that all of the dashboards implemented by your team will follow a common template that allows users to drill down on a namespace, time span, and other basic grouping details.  For Ingress, we would also like to allow a user to drill down on the Ingress controller instance they're interested in.  This way, if user wants to go from a top level system view of the last 24 hours, to a specific controller and namespace in the last hour, for example, that they can easily do this.

If you have this settled, presenting it here would be great.

Author: We don't have a fully free hand on what we can do here, as we're only supplying the dashboard data, and all the dashboard mechanics belongs to the console. Much of what you wrote seems doable, with some gotchas:

- Time selection is implemented - nothing special to do about that

- Grouping (e.g. by ingress controller instance) is possible, but is something pre-defined per chart, in the promQL query. E.g. we can have a chart for total MBps received per ingress controller instance, but the user can't change it to show a different grouping. We might create more charts if we want to show more groupings. If the users want more customized queries, they can click an "Inspect" link on any chart, and modify the query from there.

- Filtering (e.g. by namespace) is possible, but this is a dashboard global setting, meaning that it will impact all charts in the dashboard, and for that reason it could be problematic to show charts that wouldn't be affected by this filter if their metrics don't have the corresponding label. For example if we have a Namespace filter at the top of the dashboard, but some of the charts showing non-namespaced metrics (e.g. an `haproxy_frontend_something` metric that doesn't relate to routes / namespaces), that would be a design flaw and could turn out to be misleading for the users who could make wrong assumptions about the data they're seeing. If that becomes a problem because we want a filter X but some metrics don't have that label, the typical solution is to split into more dashboards, so that each dashboard has filters relevant for all its charts. For this EP we target a single dashboard, so we might be limited in terms of filtering. It could be for a follow-up improvement. Here again, when users want more customization, they can still click the "inspect" link and write their own queries.

- About the ingress controller instance (@frobware mentioned that as well): we checked and it's present indeed for some metrics, which means we can definitely show some charts with grouping by ingress controller instance.

As a starting point, we can focus on metrics mentioned in [NE-1059](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1059):

> - Number of external connections to each HAproxy instance/pod that could be grouped by client's source IP

Author: This metric, per client's source IP is likely not possible to have, ever, due to the metric cardinality that it would have. But just the number of connections, without grouping per client, should be doable

Reviewer: Please update the EP to remove metrics that you are not planning to add.  In fact, the discussion from NE-1059 should not be a part of this proposal if you're not considering other input on what metrics to use and how to display, filter, or group them.

Reviewer 3: Based on different comments, there is something that may be not clear.
We are not adding any metrics. We are only using existing metrics that are already collected by the monitoring stack and already reachable through Observe > Metrics page of the console.

> - Number/IP/names of backends per route

Author: perhaps `count(haproxy_backend_up) by (backend, exported_namespace, route)`

Reviewer: For all the metrics that end up listed here, we should have a solid understanding of the PromQuery that is needed to generate them.

- Balancing option/algorithm used by a route

> - Traffic volume (Mbps) on each ingress instance

Author: `sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m])) by (instance, pod, namespace)`

Reviewer: This is an enhancement proposal, so answered questions should go into the document, not remain as comments.

- Refresh rate of HAproxy

> - Route's backend failure count

Author: `haproxy_backend_response_errors_total` and `haproxy_backend_connection_errors_total`

These behaviours are already implemented in the Console and do not necessitate any change.

### API Extensions

No planned change on the API.

### Implementation Details / Notes / Constraints

The new `ConfigMap` installed in `openshift-config-managed` should be named `grafana-dashboard-ingress` (The `grafana-dashboard-` prefix is common for all such dashboards).

It needs to be labelled with `console.openshift.io/dashboard: "true"`.

Dashboards have a `title` field as part of their Grafana JSON model, which is displayed in the OpenShift Console where dashboards are listed.
Here `title` should be `Networking / Ingress`.

Dashboards should also have a tag that identifies their supplier in the OpenShift Console; existing tags are: `kubernetes-mixin`, `node-exporter-mixin`, `prometheus-mixin`, `etcd-mixin`.
A new tag named `networking-mixin` should be used for this new dashboard. This tag aims to group all dashboards related to networking, such as also OVN dashboards and NetObserv.
This tag is directly set in the static JSON definition of the dashboard. No more action is required for tag creation.

> A typical procedure to design and create the dashboard is to use Grafana for designing purpose, then export the dashboard as JSON and save it as an asset in the target repository. Then, it can be embedded in the built artifact using `go:embed`, and injected into a `ConfigMap`. Example:

Reviewer: You should consider the fact that there can be more than one Ingress controller.  I don't think we want to have one dashboard per Ingress controller, but we need to be able to identify a new, distinct controller that manages the installation and update of a single dashboard.  And that dashboard may need to be able to isolate different ingress controllers' metrics.

Author: This is a good point, I made the wrong assumption that IngressController resource was a singleton, now realizing that it isn't.
So, what are our options? we briefly discussed that with @frobware and @OlivierCazade this morning:

- The operator could provide the dashboard `ConfigMap` as a static YAML, as part of its manifests, just like it also provides a [ServiceMonitor](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/manifests/0000_90_ingress-operator_02_servicemonitor.yaml). That's probably the simplest way; the dashboard would be tied to the operator own lifecycle, which I think is what we want at least at the moment. Problem: it could turn out not to be flexible enough for future evolutions. For instance, like I mentioned in this EP, if in the future you want to select dashboards more dynamically based on some IngressController config (I don't know what it could be, but I can imagine using a different proxy than haproxy, which would provide a different set of metrics), then a statically deployed dashboard might be too limited.

- Another option could be to still tie it with ingress controllers, deployed programmatically, but just caring about not deploying a dashboard if one already exists, and not deleting it on ingresscontroller deletion if more ingresscontrollers are still out there. The programmatical approach offers more flexibility, in case the dashboard needs at some point to be modified dynamically, e.g. for tying charts with the metrics presence.

Do you see any other resource managed by the IngressOperator that follows a similar pattern, deployed programmatically, but not tied to a specific IngressController (or to any non-singleton controller)? If there's already a pattern in code to do that, we should probably take inspiration from it.

Author: I've added a paragraph below to explain that this is a new controller / what is watches / etc.

```golang
//go:embed dashboard.json
var dashboardEmbed string

func buildDashboard() *corev1.ConfigMap {
	configMap := corev1.ConfigMap{
		ObjectMeta: metav1.ObjectMeta{
			Name:      "grafana-dashboard-ingress",
			Namespace: "openshift-config-managed",
			Labels: map[string]string{
				"console.openshift.io/dashboard": "true",
			},
		},
		Data: map[string]string{
			"dashboard.json": dashboardEmbed,
		},
	}
	return &configMap
}

> ```

Reviewer: We're missing some details here on the new controller that will be handling dashboard creation and reconciliation.  What mechanism is used to observe and install a new/updated dashboard.json?

Author: implementation details added

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Unit test

> - Verify that the embedded JSON is parseable and contains expected elements for a dashboard (rows, panels, etc.)

Reviewer: Is there some part of the controller design that validates the json is parseable and correct?

Reviewer: But it could be modified on upgrades, so perhaps we should make sure that it passes validation during a reconciliation.

Author: This was removed to focus on e2e tests

E2E Tests

> 1. Create a new IngressController. Wait for an ingress controller pod to be deployed.

Reviewer: There are cases where there is more than one Ingress controller.  One per shard is the norm.

Author: ack, thanks

2. Verify that the new ConfigMap dashboard was created.

> 3. Delete the IngressController.

Reviewer: It's not a common operation to delete the Ingress controller, but you could still test this.  It might be worthwhile to delete the configMap and make sure it gets recreated.

Author: this was changed to delete the CM

This tag is directly set in the static JSON definition of the dashboard. No more action is required for tag creation.

A typical procedure to design and create the dashboard is to use Grafana for designing purpose, then export the dashboard as JSON and save it as an asset in the target repository. Then, it can be embedded in the built artifact using `go:embed`, and injected into a `ConfigMap`. Example:

```golang
//go:embed dashboard.json
var dashboardEmbed string

func buildDashboard() *corev1.ConfigMap {
	configMap := corev1.ConfigMap{
		ObjectMeta: metav1.ObjectMeta{
			Name:      "grafana-dashboard-ingress",
			Namespace: "openshift-config-managed",
			Labels: map[string]string{
				"console.openshift.io/dashboard": "true",
			},
		},
		Data: map[string]string{
			"dashboard.json": dashboardEmbed,
		},
	}
	return &configMap
}
```

This is achieved by a new controller added to the operator, in charge of reconciling the dashboard. This controller watches the Infrastructure object which it is bound to, and the generated configmap.

> The controller should deploy this configmap in the `openshift-config-managed`. Any configmap deployed in this namespace with the `console.openshift.io/dashboard` label will be automatically picked by the monitoring operator and deployed in the OpenShift Console. The monitoring stack is responsible for querying the metrics as defined in the dashboard.

Author: done, thanks

When the Ingress operator is upgraded to a new version, if this upgrade brings changes to the dashboard, the existing ConfigMap will be overwritten through reconciliation.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Unit test

- Verify that the embedded JSON is parseable (to avoid unintentional errors while manually editing the JSON).

E2E Tests

> There are two scenarios depending of the cluster network topology

Author: done

1. Verify that the cluster network topology is not external
2. Verify that the new ConfigMap dashboard was created.
3. Delete the Configmap
4. Verify that the ConfigMap dashboard is recreated.
5. Modify the Configmap json
6. Verify that the ConfigMap is reinitialized to the right value.

1. Verify that the cluster network topology is external
2. Verify that the ConfigMap was not deployed

### Graduation Criteria

This enhancement does not require graduation milestones.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A; This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A; This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> Upgrading from a previous release must install the new dashboard without requiring any intervention.

Reviewer 3: Yes, we wanted to address concerns about upgrade and how the controller manage the update of an existing dashboard.

The controller will always overwrite any existing dashboard with its own version.

## Proposal

To make a new dashboard discoverable by Cluster Monitoring, a `ConfigMap` needs to be created in the namespace `openshift-config-managed`, containing a static dashboard definition in Grafana format (JSON). The dashboard datasource has to be Cluster Monitoring's Prometheus.

The Ingress Operator is responsible for creating and reconciling this `ConfigMap`. We assume all metrics used in the dashboard are present unconditionally, which allows us to create a static dashboard unconditionally as well.
The Ingress Operator would embed a static and full json dashboard.
If the operator detect any change between the deployed dashboard and the embedded one, the deployed dashboard would be replaced totally by the embedded one.

### Dashboard content

At the top, a summary row presenting global cluster statistics as text panels:

- Total current byte rate in (aggregated across all routes/shards): _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m]))_
- Total current byte rate out (aggregated across all routes/shards): _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m]))_
- Total current number of routes: _count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (route))_

> - Total current number of ingress controllers: _count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (pod))_

Author: I removed this line as it was moved out of the dashboard after iterating

Below this top summary, more detailed time-series panels. Each of these panel come in two flavours: aggregated per route, and aggregated per controller instance.

- Byte rate in, per route or per controller instance: _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m])) by (route)_ or _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m])) by (pod)_

- Byte rate out, per route or per controller instance: _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m])) by (route)_ or _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m])) by (pod)_

- Response error rate, per route or per controller instance: _sum(irate(haproxy_server_response_errors_total[180s])) by (route)_ or _sum(irate(haproxy_server_response_errors_total[180s])) by (pod)_

> - Average response latency, per route or per controller instance: _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (route)_ or _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (pod)_

Author: I was reluctant at first to go that deep into the details in the EP, for that exact reason, but was incited to do so... I would actually prefer to not write here the exact promQL so that it's a little more abstracted from these implementation details. If you're good with that, I can remove the promql

> - Average response latency, per route or per controller instance: _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (route)_ or _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (pod)_

Author: so I removed the promQL to avoid making the EP too easily outdated

> - Average response latency, per route or per controller instance: _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (route)_ or _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (pod)_

Author: We rephrased it as "per ingress shard"

### Workflow Description

A cluster administrator will be able to view this dashboard from the OpenShift Console, in the _Administrator_ view, under _Observe_ > _Dashboards_ menu.
Several dashboards are already listed there, e.g:

- `Kubernetes / Compute Resources / Pod` (tag: `kubernetes-mixin`)
- `Kubernetes / Compute Resources / Workload` (tag: `kubernetes-mixin`)
- `Kubernetes / Networking / Cluster` (tag: `kubernetes-mixin`)
- `Node Exporter / USE Method / Cluster` (tag: `node-exporter-mixin`)
- `Node Exporter / USE Method / Node` (tag: `node-exporter-mixin`)

The new ingress dashboard will be listed there, as:
- `Networking / Ingress` (tag: `networking-mixin`)

This "Networking" category can potentially be used for other Network-related dashboards, such as for OVN, NetObserv, etc.

> Clicking on this dashboard will open it, showing time-series charts such as cluster ingress stats and HAProxy metrics.
> On each chart, an "Inspect" link allows to view that metrics from the _Metrics_ page, which allows to customize the query (e.g: modifying the label filters, the grouping, etc.) and view the result directly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Clicking on this dashboard will open it, showing time-series charts, such as cluster ingress stats and HAProxy metrics.
On each chart, an "Inspect" link allows the user to view that metric from the _Metrics_ page, which allows the user to customize the query (for example, to modify the label filters, the grouping, etc.) and view the result directly.
```

Note that editing a query from the _Metrics_ page does not affect dashboards displayed in the _Dashboards_ page.
These behaviours are already implemented in the Console and do not necessitate any change.

### API Extensions

No planned change on the API.

### Implementation Details / Notes / Constraints

> The new `ConfigMap` installed in `openshift-config-managed` should be named `grafana-dashboard-ingress` (The `grafana-dashboard-` prefix is common for all such dashboards).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The new `ConfigMap` installed in `openshift-config-managed` should be named `grafana-dashboard-ingress` (the `grafana-dashboard-` prefix is common for all such dashboards).
```
or
```suggestion
The new `ConfigMap` installed in `openshift-config-managed` should be named `grafana-dashboard-ingress`. (The `grafana-dashboard-` prefix is common for all such dashboards.)
```

It needs to be labelled with `console.openshift.io/dashboard: "true"`.

Dashboards have a `title` field as part of their Grafana JSON model, which is displayed in the OpenShift Console where dashboards are listed.
Here `title` should be `Networking / Ingress`.

Dashboards should also have a tag that identifies their supplier in the OpenShift Console; existing tags are: `kubernetes-mixin`, `node-exporter-mixin`, `prometheus-mixin`, `etcd-mixin`.

> A new tag named `networking-mixin` should be used for this new dashboard. This tag aims to group all dashboards related to networking, such as also OVN dashboards and NetObserv.

Reviewer 4: You're referring to future dashboards, right?
```suggestion
A new tag named `networking-mixin` should be used for this new dashboard. This tag aims to group all dashboards related to networking, such as OVN dashboards and NetObserv dashboards that may be added in the future.
```

This tag is directly set in the static JSON definition of the dashboard. No more action is required for tag creation.

A typical procedure to design and create the dashboard is to use Grafana for designing purpose, then export the dashboard as JSON and save it as an asset in the target repository. Then, it can be embedded in the built artifact using `go:embed`, and injected into a `ConfigMap`. Example:

```golang
//go:embed dashboard.json
var dashboardEmbed string

func buildDashboard() *corev1.ConfigMap {
	configMap := corev1.ConfigMap{
		ObjectMeta: metav1.ObjectMeta{
			Name:      "grafana-dashboard-ingress",
			Namespace: "openshift-config-managed",
			Labels: map[string]string{
				"console.openshift.io/dashboard": "true",
			},
		},
		Data: map[string]string{
			"dashboard.json": dashboardEmbed,
		},
	}
	return &configMap
}
```

> This is achieved by a new controller added to the operator, in charge of reconciling the dashboard. This controller watches the Infrastructure object which it is bound to, and the generated configmap.

Reviewer 4: What does "this" refer to?  The new controller isn't exporting from Grafana.  

Where does the Infrastructure object come into the picture?  This is the first mention of it in the EP.  Is that the cluster `Infrastructure.config.openshift.io` object?  Ah, upon further reading, I wonder whether this is related to the external topology mode that HyperShift uses to suppress creation of a default IngressController?
```suggestion
This exported json is used by a new controller that is added to the Ingress Operator to reconcile the dashboard. This controller watches the Infrastructure object which it is bound to, and the generated configmap.
```

Reviewer 3: Yes the Infrastructure object mentioned is Infrastructure.config.openshift.io

The dashboard is only created if the cluster network topology is not external. To get this information, the controller query the Infrastucture object and then watch this object to detect any change in the cluster network topology.

The controller should deploy this configmap in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace. Any configmap deployed in this namespace with the `console.openshift.io/dashboard` label will be automatically picked by the monitoring operator and deployed in the OpenShift Console. The monitoring stack is responsible for querying the metrics as defined in the dashboard.

When the Ingress operator is upgraded to a new version, if this upgrade brings changes to the dashboard, the existing ConfigMap will be overwritten through reconciliation.

Note that, despite this work taking place in the Ingress Operator codebase, the implementation and initial maintenance are done by the NetObserv team.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

> 

Reviewer 4: I'm suspicious when an EP doesn't list any risks or drawbacks!  Is there a risk of providing misleading information (for example, an inaccurate error rates graph) or redundant information (for example, reporting errors that are already reported by alerts)?  Could this cause customers who would otherwise have devised their own dashboards to flood us with RFEs for this dashboard?

Author: Sure we can add that.
Another one that I see is that it creates a dependency on haproxy metrics, which would require updates if they change.

## Design Details

### Test Plan

Unit test

- Verify that the embedded JSON is parseable (to avoid unintentional errors while manually editing the JSON).

E2E Tests

There are two scenarios depending on the cluster network topology

> 1. Verify that the cluster network topology is not external

Reviewer 4: What's the point of this step?  Is this referring to the external topology mode that can be used on HyperShift to suppress creation of a default IngressController?  Is this something that other E2E tests wouldn't need?

2. Verify that the new ConfigMap dashboard was created.
3. Delete the Configmap
4. Verify that the ConfigMap dashboard is recreated.
5. Modify the Configmap json

> 6. Verify that the ConfigMap is reinitialized to the right value.

Reviewer 4: Recently we have been doing this sort of test using unit tests with a fake client and fake reconciler.  You can search for `Test_Reconcile` to see some examples.

Reviewer 3: This test procedure was implemented as a e2e test in the PR:
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/962/files#diff-0c5cdc75d6910152df4d57b17e2257ae3a7cbf5bc718d868087f3e6b9e903022

Should we transform the test to a unit test?

1. Verify that the cluster network topology is external
2. Verify that the ConfigMap was not deployed

### Graduation Criteria

This enhancement does not require graduation milestones.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A; This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A; This feature will go directly to GA.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Upgrading from a previous release must install the new dashboard without requiring any intervention.

> On next upgrades, if the dashboard already exists and if the new version brings changes to the dashboard, the existing one will be overwritten with the new one.

Reviewer 4: On downgrade, I guess the configmap doesn't get deleted?  Does the downgraded cluster display the residual dashboard?  Does it matter?

Author: I guess you're correct. If it matters or not: I would say it doesn't matter currently, since the haproxy metrics used here aren't new, so the dashboard would remain useful? It may matter in the future if there is a change in haproxy metrics; in that case, what do you suggest: should we document to manually delete the configmap?

Author: text added for downgrade

Reviewer 3: Yes downgrade to a version that is not supporting the dashboard would not delete the dashboard.

I would agree with Joel that it does not matter since the dashboard is compatible with the current metrics.

A downgrade between two version supporting the dashboard would result int the dashboard being downgraded.

### Version Skew Strategy

> N/A

Reviewer 4: Does the Grafana json have a schema that could change?  Is the schema versioned?

Reviewer 5: Yes this is correct.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

#### Failure Modes

N/A

#### Support Procedures

> 

Reviewer 4: Is there anything to look at if the dashboard doesn't appear or isn't updating?

Author: I added some info, but there's not a lot to do beside troubleshooting / bug hunting (ie. no config), so the best I can do is offer some clues on how to start troubleshooting but this is not a comprehensive solution

## Implementation History

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 4: One alternative would be to leave it to the customer to build a custom dashboard outside of the console.  Another would be to make it fully customizable (for example, let the customer go into Grafana, modify the dashboard, export json, and have the operator persist the modified dashboard).  These aren't necessarily desirable alternatives. but they're the kind of things I would expect an EP to mention.

Reviewer 3: I added elements regarding alternatives.
Regarding the second alternative, if the customer already has an exported json dashbord, I don't see any benefits for him to have to go through the ingress operator instead of directly creating the configmap. Which is already possible.

## Motivation

While ingress related metrics already exist and are accessible in the OpenShift Console (via the menu “Observe” > “Metrics”), there is no consolidated view presenting a summary of them. There are existing dashboards in other areas (such as etcd, compute resources, etc.), but networking today is less represented there, despite its importance for monitoring and troubleshooting.
Metrics such as HAProxy error rates or latency can be made more visible by promoting them in a dashboard.

In addition, product management has shown interest in providing and making more visible some cluster-wide statistics, such as the number of routes and shards in use.

More details on the new dashboard content is provided below.

### Goals

1. Design and implement a new dashboard using a selection of metrics listed below.
2. Update the Ingress Operator to deploy this dashboard configmap, making it accessible for the Cluster Monitoring stack.

> ### Non-Goals

Author: Thanks, it's mentioned in several places that this is for the admin view, but I'll add a non-goal about devs for more clarity.

## Proposal

To make a new dashboard discoverable by Cluster Monitoring, a `ConfigMap` needs to be created in the namespace `openshift-config-managed`, containing a static dashboard definition in Grafana format (JSON). The dashboard datasource has to be Cluster Monitoring's Prometheus.

The Ingress Operator is responsible for creating and reconciling this `ConfigMap`. We assume all metrics used in the dashboard are present unconditionally, which allows us to create a static dashboard unconditionally as well.
The Ingress Operator embeds a static json manifest for the full dashboard.
If the operator detects any change between the deployed dashboard and the embedded one, the operator replaces the deployed dashboard with the embedded one.

### Dashboard content

At the top, a summary row presenting global cluster statistics as text panels:

- Total current byte rate in (aggregated across all routes/shards): _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m]))_
- Total current byte rate out (aggregated across all routes/shards): _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m]))_

> - Total current number of routes: _count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (route))_

Author: hmm this isn't the same thing, the one you gave doesn't count just routes
Anyway, this query was removed from the dashboard after iterating, I updated the EP

> - Total current number of routes: _count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (route))_

Reviewer 3: Sorry the request there was not up to date.
We want to count by service but only once per route so we did this request:

> count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (route, service)) by (service)

- Total current number of ingress controllers: _count(count(haproxy_server_up == 1) by (pod))_

Below this top summary, more detailed time-series panels. Each of these panel come in two flavours: aggregated per route, and aggregated per controller instance.

- Byte rate in, per route or per controller instance: _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m])) by (route)_ or _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_in_total[1m])) by (pod)_

- Byte rate out, per route or per controller instance: _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m])) by (route)_ or _sum(rate(haproxy_server_bytes_out_total[1m])) by (pod)_

- Response error rate, per route or per controller instance: _sum(irate(haproxy_server_response_errors_total[180s])) by (route)_ or _sum(irate(haproxy_server_response_errors_total[180s])) by (pod)_

> - Average response latency, per route or per controller instance: _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (route)_ or _avg(haproxy_server_http_average_response_latency_milliseconds != 0) by (pod)_

Reviewer 5: Hmm this looks like a feature request for the console dashboards?
